Introduction
The burden of periodontal diseases (PD), including both gingivitis and periodontitis, in England is substantial. The Adult Oral Health Survey 2021 reported that 19% of adults had been told by a dental professional that they had PD, and 27% had bleeding gums [1]. These values were self-reported, and may represent underestimations considering the potential disruptions caused by the COVID-19 pandemic to the survey. Globally, there was an estimated 50% increase in oral disease cases between 1990 and 2019, which was higher than the 45% population growth over the period [2]. This trend is expected to increase in high-income countries as the ageing populations results in individuals living longer with chronic diseases [3]. Estimations using multi-state population models for periodontal pocketing in the UK project an 8.7% increase from 2020 to 2050, with severe pocketing increasing by 56.7% [4]. This represents a sizable proportion of the population at risk of PD, a chronic inflammatory disease preventable in early stages through targeted oral interventions. 
There is substantial evidence that PD is a risk factor for dementia [5,6]. Although PD and dementia share common risk factors there is strong evidence supporting a causal link. Periodontal infection leads to systemic inflammation, allowing high inflammatory immune responses to cross the blood-brain barrier which activates the microglial cells in the cerebral cortex, which may contribute to the pathogenesis of dementia [7,8]. Dementia patients have shown higher fusobacterium loads, as well as Campylobacter rectus and Porphyromonas gingivalis, both species of bacteria that are biomarkers for severe PD [9]. One review found that PD was associated with a 22% higher risk of incident dementia during a mean follow up of 11 years, with another using cohort studies to suggest a relative risk (RR) of 1.18 (1.06-1.31) for incident dementia in relation to PD [6,10]. There is bidirectional causality, as an individual’s ability to maintain their oral health deteriorates with increased dementia symptoms [11]. However, trial emulation studies testing periodontal treatments have shown their ability to reduce dementia-related brain atrophy in the treatment arms (-0.41; 95% CI; -0.70 to -0.12; P= 0.0051) [12]. A retrospective cohort study also identified that periodontal treatment reduced the risk of dementia mortality [13]. Longitudinal cohort studies have revealed that PD was significantly associated with increased dementia incidence, even after adjusting for major chronic diseases [14,15,16]. These longitudinal studies were restricted to dementia-free participants at baseline, minimising reverse causality. 
Dementia costs in England are expected to rise significantly, with one estimate forecasting a 173% rise from 2019 to 2040, totalling £80.4 billion by 2040 [17]. Costs for England account for 85% of the total 2040 costs for the UK. The same projection gives 1,352,400 million total older people living with dementia in England in 2040, also accounting for 85% of the UK’s total burden. Approximately 45% of all dementia cases are attributable to preventable risk factors [18]. Modelling the effects of population-based interventions on dementia risk factors can provide estimates of potential cost-saving. For example, raising cigarette prices by 10% has been estimated to lead to 2,277 quality-adjusted life years (QALYs) gained and cost-saving of £157 million in England [19]. If hypertension prevalence fell in England and Wales by 50% between 2027 and 2060, an estimated 57 fewer deaths per 100,000 population but an increase of 9 more dementia cases per 100,000 is expected [20]. This highlights the interplay between reduced risk factor prevalence and extended life expectancy, which may raise overall dementia prevalence. A 50% reduction in the current global prevalence of PD could prevent 850,000 individuals from developing dementia [6]. Given the strong evidence linking periodontal disease to dementia and the projected rise in dementia-related costs, estimating the effects of reducing periodontal disease prevalence is essential to inform prevention strategies. 
We use an individual-level microsimulation model to estimate the costs and benefits associated with changes in PD prevalence on future dementia outcomes. We start with the current estimated PD prevalence of 50%, then test a best- and worst-case scenario of 25% and 75%. This will account for the effects of other dementia risk factors on both dementia and mortality risk. 












References
[1] Office for Health Improvement and Disparities. Adult Oral Health Survey 2021: a report on the main findings of the 2021 Adult Oral Health Survey. London: Office for Health Improvement and Disparities; 2024 Jan 25. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/adult-oral-health-survey-2021 
[2] World Health Organization. Global oral health status report: towards universal health coverage for oral health by 2030. Geneva: World Health Organization; 2022.
[3] United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division. World population prospects. 2022 [Accessed October 21 2025]. Available from: https://population.un.org/wpp/Download/Standard/Population/
[4] Elamin A, Ansah JP. Projecting the burden of dental caries and periodontal diseases among the adult population in the United Kingdom using a multi-state population model. Front Public Health. 2023;11:1190197. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2023.1190197
[5] Pazos P, Leira Y, Domínguez C, Pías-Peleteiro JM, Blanco J, Aldrey JM. Association between periodontal disease and dementia: a literature review. Neurologia (Engl Ed). 2018;33(9):602–613. doi:10.1016/j.nrleng.2016.09.017
[6] Nadim R, Tang J, Dilmohamed A, Yuan S, Wu C, Bakre AT, Partridge M, Ni J, Copeland JR, Anstey KJ, Chen R. Influence of periodontal disease on risk of dementia. European journal of epidemiology. 2020;35(9):821-33.
[7] Watts A, Crimmins EM, Gatz M. Inflammation as a potential mediator for the association between periodontal disease and Alzheimer’s disease. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008;4(5):865–876. doi:10.2147/ndt.s3610
[8] Carter CJ, France J, Crean S, Singhrao SK. The Porphyromonas gingivalis/host interactome shows enrichment in GWASdb genes related to Alzheimer’s disease, diabetes and cardiovascular diseases. Front Aging Neurosci. 2017;9:408. doi:10.3389/fnagi.2017.00408
[9] Borsa L, Dubois M, Sacco G, Lupi L. Analysis of the link between periodontal diseases and Alzheimer’s disease: a systematic review. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2021;18(17):9312. doi:10.3390/ijerph18179312
[10] Dibello V, Custodero C, Cavalcanti R, Lafornara D, Dibello A, Lozupone M, Daniele A, Pilotto A, Panza F, Solfrizzi V. Impact of periodontal disease on cognitive disorders, dementia, and depression: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Geroscience. 2024;46(5):5133–5169. doi:10.1007/s11357-024-01237-1
[11] Gao C, Kang J. Oral diseases are associated with cognitive decline and dementia. In: Oral microbiome: symbiosis, dysbiosis and microbiome interventions for maintaining oral and systemic health. 2025 Mar 21. p.171–183. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-55574-7_11
[12] Schwahn C, Frenzel S, Holtfreter B, et al. Effect of periodontal treatment on preclinical Alzheimer’s disease—results of a trial emulation approach. Alzheimers Dement. 2022;18:127–141. doi:10.1002/alz.12378
[13] Ho HA, Kim BR, Shin H. Association of periodontal disease treatment with mortality in patients with dementia: a population-based retrospective cohort study (2002–2018). Sci Rep. 2024;14:5243. doi:10.1038/s41598-024-55272-6
[14] Chen CK, Wu YT, Chang YC. Association between chronic periodontitis and the risk of Alzheimer’s disease: a retrospective, population-based, matched-cohort study. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2017;9(1):56. doi:10.1186/s13195-017-0282-6
[15] Lee YT, Lee HC, Hu CJ, Huang LK, Chao SP, Lin CP, Su EC, Lee YC, Chen CC. Periodontitis as a modifiable risk factor for dementia: a nationwide population-based cohort study. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2017;65(2):301–305. doi:10.1111/jgs.14517
[16] Choi S, Kim K, Chang J, Kim SM, Kim SJ, Cho HJ, Park SM. Association of chronic periodontitis with Alzheimer’s disease or vascular dementia. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2019;67(6):1234–1239. doi:10.1111/jgs.15802
[17] Wittenberg R, Hu B, Barraza-Araiza L, Rehill A. Projections of older people living with dementia and costs of dementia care in the United Kingdom, 2019–2040. London: Care Policy and Evaluation Centre, London School of Economics and Political Science; 2019 Nov. Report No.: 79.
[18] Livingston G, Huntley J, Liu KY, Costafreda SG, Selbæk G, Alladi S, Ames D, Banerjee S, Burns A, Brayne C, Fox NC. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2024 report of the Lancet Standing Commission. Lancet. 2024;404(10452):572–628. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(24)01302-2
[19] Mukadam N, Anderson R, Walsh S, Wittenberg R, Knapp M, Brayne C, Livingston G. Benefits of population-level interventions for dementia risk factors: an economic modelling study for England. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2024;5(9):e567–e577. doi:10.1016/S2666-7568(24)00156-3
[20] Chen Y, Araghi M, Bandosz P, Shipley MJ, Ahmadi-Abhari S, Lobanov-Rostovsky S, Venkatraman T, Kivimaki M, O’Flaherty M, Brunner EJ. Impact of hypertension prevalence trend on mortality and burdens of dementia and disability in England and Wales to 2060: a simulation modelling study. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2023;4(9):e470–e477. doi:10.1016/S2666-7568(23)00163-5



