Introduction
The economic burden of cardiovascular disease (CVD) in the UK is significant, despite falling incidence and mortality rates in recent years [1]. The total costs of coronary heart disease (CHD) and stroke in England are forecast to reach £19.6 billion and £15.9 billion, respectively [2]. CVDs cause approximately 25% of all deaths in the UK and significantly raise an individual’s likelihood of developing vascular dementia [3]. Despite a 30% fall in CVD incidence between 2000 and 2019, the economic burden remains high [4]. As CVD affects a large proportion of the population, preventive measures must be cost-effective and deliver health gains beyond CVD, leading to downstream cost reductions. 
Periodontal disease (PD) affects at least 50% of people in the UK, with severe periodontal pocketing expected to increase by 56.7% by 2050 [5,6]. A growing number of longitudinal cohort studies and randomised controlled trials supports evidence that treating PD can lower risk of CVD. Non-surgical periodontal therapy has been found to reduce cardiovascular biomarkers in patients with stable coronary artery disease, and to improve endothelial function in patients with a recent myocardial infarction and severe PD [7,8,9]. A meta-analysis significant reductions in interleukin-6 and systolic blood pressure levels in the treated groups [10]. In patients that have suffered a recent stroke, both standard and intensive PD treatment reduced later stroke and MI mortality [11]. A limitation of trial studies is short follow-up time and small patient pool, therefore longitudinal evidence has to be used to establish stronger causal links. A meta-analysis of longitudinal studies calculated that the risk of all incident CVD was 22% higher in individuals with PD, and the risk of incident CVD increased ascendingly with PD severity [12]. A further review showed consistent findings when stratified by sex and by specific CVD event (CHD; OR = 1.19, 95% CI: 1.09-1.3 and stroke; OR = 1.29, 95% CI: 1.09-1.53) [13]. None of these studies explicitly assess the cost-effectiveness of treating PD to prevent CVD events, and since healthcare budgets are expected to become more constrained as the population ages it is important to consider this in policy planning [14]. 
A prior UK study found non-surgical periodontal therapy cost-effective for improving glycated haemoglobin in Type 2 diabetes [15], and a US analysis suggested PD therapy is cost-effective in reducing diabetes-related microvascular disease [16]. Whether periodontal therapy is cost-effective as a CVD prevention strategy remains unknown. 
We use a state-transition Markov model to estimate to what extent non-surgical periodontal therapy for adults with severe PD will have a downstream effect on reducing the costs of later CVD events. The NHS perspective will be taken. Long-term costs and effects, using quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), will provide a valuation of periodontal therapy’s role in CVD burden management. Ischaemic stroke and heart attack will be modelled as the CVD outcomes arising from PD risk.
The consistent causal link between CVD and PD highlights the potential benefit that population-level PD interventions can have on reducing CVD risk and mortality. 



References
[1] Shih K, Herz N, Sheikh A, O'Neill C, Carter P, Anderson M. Economic burden of cardiovascular disease in the United Kingdom. Eur Heart J Qual Care Clin Outcomes. 2025 Feb 24;qcaf011. https://doi.org/10.1093/ehjqcco/qcaf011
[2] Landeiro F, Harris C, Groves D, O’Neill S, Jandu KS, Tacconi EM, Field S, Patel N, Göpfert A, Hagson H, Leal J. The economic burden of cancer, coronary heart disease, dementia, and stroke in England in 2018, with projection to 2050: an evaluation of two cohort studies. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2024 Aug 1;5(8):e514–23.
[3] British Heart Foundation. UK Cardiovascular Disease Factsheet. London: British Heart Foundation; 2025 Sep. Available from: https://www.bhf.org.uk/-/media/files/for-professionals/research/heart-statistics/bhf-cvd-statistics-uk-factsheet.pdf?rev=0759fdcb1d3248f9b9331c4039e6075c&hash=B0C8BEA1A48B306E4D2FC73C4265FBFA (Accessed 27 October 2025).
[4] Conrad N, Molenberghs G, Verbeke G, Zaccardi F, Lawson C, Friday JM, Su H, Jhund PS, Sattar N, Rahimi K, Cleland JG. Trends in cardiovascular disease incidence among 22 million people in the UK over 20 years: population based study. BMJ. 2024 Jun 26;385: e075210.
[5] Department of Health and Social Care, NHS England. Delivering better oral health: an evidence-based toolkit for prevention. Chapter 5: periodontal diseases. London: Department of Health and Social Care; updated 10 September 2025. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/delivering-better-oral-health
[6] Elamin A, Ansah JP. Projecting the burden of dental caries and periodontal diseases among the adult population in the United Kingdom using a multi-state population model. Front Public Health. 2023;11:1190197. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2023.1190197
[7] Montenegro MM, Ribeiro IW, Kampits C, Saffi MA, Furtado MV, Polanczyk CA, Haas AN, Rösing CK. Randomized controlled trial of the effect of periodontal treatment on cardiovascular risk biomarkers in patients with stable coronary artery disease: preliminary findings of 3 months. J Clin Periodontol. 2019 Mar;46(3):321–31.
[8] H. Bokhari SA, Khan AA, Butt AK, Azhar M, Hanif M, Izhar M, Tatakis DN. Non‐surgical periodontal therapy reduces coronary heart disease risk markers: a randomized controlled trial. Journal of clinical periodontology. 2012 Nov;39(11):1065-74.
[9] Lobo MG, Schmidt MM, Lopes RD, Dipp T, Feijó IP, Schmidt KE, Gazeta CA, Azeredo ML, Markoski M, Pellanda LC, Gottschall CA. Treating periodontal disease in patients with myocardial infarction: a randomized clinical trial. Eur J Intern Med. 2020 Jan 1;71:76–80.
[10] Meng R, Xu J, Fan C, Liao H, Wu Z, Zeng Q. Effect of non-surgical periodontal therapy on risk markers of cardiovascular disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. BMC Oral Health. 2024 Jun 14;24(1):692.
[11] Sen S, Curtis J, Hicklin D, Nichols C, Glover S, Merchant AT, Hardin JW, Logue M, Meyer J, Mason E, Huang DY. Periodontal disease treatment after stroke or transient ischemic attack: the PREMIERS Study, a randomized clinical trial. Stroke. 2023 Sep;54(9):2214–22.
[12] Larvin H, Kang J, Aggarwal VR, Pavitt S, Wu J. Risk of incident cardiovascular disease in people with periodontal disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Clin Exp Dent Res. 2021 Feb;7(1):109–22.
[13] Leng Y, Hu Q, Ling Q, Yao X, Liu M, Chen J, Yan Z, Dai Q. Periodontal disease is associated with the risk of cardiovascular disease independent of sex: a meta-analysis. Front Cardiovasc Med. 2023 Feb 27;10:1114927.
[14] Rachet-Jacquet L, Rocks S, Charlesworth A. Long-term projections of health care funding, bed capacity and workforce needs in England. Health Policy. 2023 Jun 1;132:104815.
[15] Solowiej‐Wedderburn J, Ide M, Pennington M. Cost‐effectiveness of non‐surgical periodontal therapy for patients with type 2 diabetes in the UK. J Clin Periodontol. 2017 Jul;44(7):700–7.
[16] Choi SE, Sima C, Pandya A. Impact of treating oral disease on preventing vascular diseases: a model-based cost-effectiveness analysis of periodontal treatment among patients with type 2 diabetes. Diabetes Care. 2020 Mar 1;43(3):563-71.
