Methods
Model overview
Our model is a hazard-based microsimulation with individuals assigned exposures to risk factors based on the 2023 prevalence in England. We chose to simulate up to 2040 using annual time steps. It is stochastic in order to hold other factors constant while testing the effects of changing PD prevalence on dementia-related outcomes. New entrants were added using ONS population projections for the estimated number [1,7]. Dementia cases formally diagnosed and added on the Primary Care Dementia Data register were used to set the model. 
Individual-based models have been commonly used to forecast individual costs and benefits through defined dementia stages. The MISCAN-Dementia microsimulation model based on a Dutch population is a time-to-event model in which transitions depend on the duration of dementia stages [2]. Dementia events are age-specific, but time varying due to calendar effects. Mortality related to dementia is implicitly given by the duration of dementia stage. The US-based Future Elderly Model projects chronic conditions such as dementia using transitional probabilities, with age-varying risk factors [3]. Aligning risks to change with age is necessary in modelling for dementia, where the onset and death increases with age [4]. Our model is similar to the IMPACT-BAM model that combines longitudinal data and mortality projections for transition probabilities [5]. 
Dementia in our model is split in five stages; cognitively normal, mild, moderate, severe, and death. Individuals can die at any stage of causes other than dementia. State changes are simulated each year, with probabilities attached to individuals with dementia to be treated at home, in an institution, or remain in current location. It was assumed that all institutions are NHS-funded. Dementia was defined as all-cause dementia, referring to any type of dementia regardless of its cause, due to its use in epidemiological studies to capture the effects on the total dementia burden. This reflects the definition of dementia recorded by Primary Care Dementia Data collected by NHS England [6]. The baseline onset probability of dementia was calculated using current dementia incidence from NHS England data. New entrants accounting for the aging population changes were calculated from ONS projections [7]. We calibrated our model to prevalence, population and mortality data for 2024 (supplementary information pp.xx-xx for full details). 

Equation 1 Dementia onset formula 
The mean time in each dementia stage has been collected from literature [7]. This provides a constant hazard for the effect that time in a dementia stage has on disease progression. We have then used a parametric proportional hazards age effect to scale the increasing effects that age has on dementia onset. This provides a continuous increase in risk with age rather than discrete banding, as seen in longitudinal studies of dementia incidence [8,9]. We calculated the relevant β’s for the per-year log-hazard slope increase of stage transitions [10,11,12]. The risk factor effects are then applied to each individual specific transition, depending on where they are in the model and what risk factors that have.  Equation 1 shows how onset probability is calculated for each individual. We applied a uniform 2% annual inflation to the baseline onset hazard to align projections with observed and projected macro incidence trends [13]. The multiplier is applied before age and risk-factor adjustments, so relative risks remain unchanged. Only the overall level shifts to reflect population-wide drivers such as demographic momentum and diagnostic improvements. Full details of our model mechanisms are provided in the supplementary information (pp.x-x). 

Risk factors
Accurate dementia projections need to account for changes in incidence and competing risks over an individual’s lifetime [14]. In this model, risk factors interact with dementia onset and the probability of death in the severe stage. Only the time spent in dementia stages effects the progression through stages. We used HRs from literature to build risk factor interaction terms, split by sex where available. These selected risk factors were chosen due to the available evidence linking them to increased dementia risk, while together representing the major preventable factors of dementia incident. Prevalence and relative risk were held constant, with only PD prevalence changing. 
The prevalence of PD in England was set as 50% in our baseline model, based on NHS Dental estimates [15]. Dementia onset probability and death resulting from PD was sourced from large national studies calculating risk of incident dementia and death [16,17]. The alternative runs featured a PD prevalence of 25% and 75%, with risk of onset and death being held constant due to the scope of our study.
The model included smoking status, diabetes, cerebrovascular disease and cardiovascular disease as risk factors. Whether an individual smokes, or has a history of smoking, is an established risk factor for dementia [18,19]. Sex differences in related onset have been explored, which is reflected in our model parameters (supplementary information pp.xx-xx) [20]. Longitudinal studies have demonstrated Type 2 diabetes as a risk factor for dementia, linking chronic hyperglycaemia to damaged blood vessels in the brain and systemic inflammation and oxidative stress [21,22]. We used diabetes as a proxy for obesity related-risk as the metabolic syndrome mechanisms are significantly associated with increased dementia risk, whereas obesity individually has a minor independent effect on dementia risk or death [23]. We chose stroke and heart failure as the specific cerebrovascular and cardiovascular diseases to model, respectively. Strokes cause brain tissue damage due to interrupted blood flow, with strong evidence suggesting those with prior stroke are at a heightened risk of dementia onset [24]. Heart failure was chosen as a representative risk factor as it captures the contribution of cardiac disfunction to dementia onset and death [18]. Prevalence data for each was obtained through national survey sources [25,26,27]. 
This risk set captures the vascular, lifestyle and inflammatory pathways that influence cognitive decline. Risk factors remain constant from an individual’s entry into the model. Full HR values can be found in the supplementary information (pp.xx-xx).

Cases per 1000 population
Smoking

Periodontal Disease

Cerebrovascular Disease (Stroke)

Cardiovascular Disease (Heart failure)

Diabetes

Table 1 Disease characteristics of baseline population

Estimation of costs and QALYs
We estimated the economic costs of dementia for the NHS and informal caregivers. Costing data was sourced from a 2024 report on dementia and deflated down to 2023 prices [28, 29]. These included healthcare, social care, unpaid care and quality of life costs, which we separated into costs for dementia patients in home or institution care. This allowed direct comparison of costs under differing PD prevalences and alignment with other dementia-modelling studies. 
QALYs are commonly used to value the benefit of interventions, with one QALY equating a year of life in perfect health [30]. This means years of life can take into account the quality and quantity of life. Dementia stage specific QALY utility values were obtained from a previous study modelling the benefits of population-level interventions for dementia risk factors [31]. Age specific utility values for cognitively normal were taken from the UK Population Norms for EQ-5D [32]. An informal caregiver for someone with dementia will also see their quality of life affected due to the strain of care, therefore, we calculated the QALYs for all informal caregivers in the model. These utility values were attained from literature assessing the impact of caring for people with dementia [33]. An annual discount rate of 3.5% was applied to both costs and QALYs as suggested by the National Institute of  Care and Excellence (NICE) and the UK Treasury [34]. Full methodology for the measurement of costs and QALYs can be found in the supplementary information (pp.x-x). 

Outcomes
Differences in incidence and prevalence rates over time were calculated, and the incident dementia due to PD at each prevalence level was analysed. The model simulated the economic costs and QALYs for dementia patients either in home care, which included the effects on their informal caregivers, or to the NHS. Using the three different PD prevalence cases, we estimate the QALYs gained and cost-saving of reducing PD disease. We report the cumulative number of new cases of dementia and deaths in each scenario, providing estimates of the deaths avoided given different PD prevalence trends. 

Sensitivity analysis
We used sensitivity analysis to test uncertainties in our model assumptions. Our primary method of sensitivity analysis was probabilistic sensitivity analysis on key model parameters. The γ-distribution was used to model uncertainty for cost inputs and the β-distribution for utility and probability parameters. Where confidence intervals were missing from source data, a ±10% relative standard deviation was used to explore uncertainty. We ran 1000 iterations to obtain values and 95% confidence intervals for each output. Alternate values for the annual dementia onset inflator were tested to model uncertainty over future prevention and population health changes. Each sensitivity analysis was run for the three PD prevalence cases. 

Role of the funding source
The funder of the study had no role in the study design, collection or analysis of the data; the writing of the report or where to submit for publication. 


References 
[1] Office for National Statistics. Estimates of the population for England and Wales [Internet]. 2023. Available from: https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationestimates/datasets/estimatesofthepopulationforenglandandwales 
[2] Brück CC, Wolters FJ, Ikram MA, de Kok IM. Projected prevalence and incidence of dementia accounting for secular trends and birth cohort effects: a population-based microsimulation study. Eur J Epidemiol. 2022;37(8):807–814. doi:10.1007/s10654-022-00894-8
[3] Ermini Leaf D, Tysinger B, Goldman DP, Lakdawalla DN. Predicting quantity and quality of life with the Future Elderly Model. Health Econ. 2021;30(Suppl 1):52–79. doi:10.1002/hec.4445
[4] Olfson M, Stroup TS, Huang C, Wall MM, Gerhard T. Age and incidence of dementia diagnosis. J Gen Intern Med. 2021;36(7):2167–2169. doi:10.1007/s11606-021-06670-y
[5] Chen Y, Araghi M, Bandosz P, Shipley MJ, Ahmadi-Abhari S, Lobanov-Rostovsky S, Venkatraman T, Kivimaki M, O’Flaherty M, Brunner EJ. Impact of hypertension prevalence trend on mortality and burdens of dementia and disability in England and Wales to 2060: a simulation modelling study. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2023;4(9):e470–e477. doi:10.1016/S2666-7568(23)00163-5 
[6] NHS Digital. Primary Care Dementia Data, December 2023. England: NHS Digital; 2024. Available from: https://digital.nhs.uk/data-and-information/publications/statistical/primary-care-dementia-data/december-2023
[7] Office for National Statistics. Population projections for regions by five-year age groups and sex, England [Internet]. 2023. Available from: https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationprojections/datasets/regionsinenglandtable1 
[8] Tariot PN, Boada M, Lanctôt KL, et al. Relationships of change in Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) on patient outcomes and probability of progression: observational analysis. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2024;16:36. doi:10.1186/s13195-024-01399-7
[9] Matthews FE, Stephan BCM, Robinson L, Jagger C, Barnes LE, Arthur A, Brayne C. A two decade dementia incidence comparison from the Cognitive Function and Ageing Studies I and II. Nat Commun. 2016;7:11398. doi:10.1038/ncomms11398
[10] Licher S, et al. Lifetime risk of common neurological diseases in the elderly population. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2019;90(2):148–156. doi:10.1136/jnnp-2018-318650
[11] Crowell V, Reyes A, Zhou SQ, et al. Disease severity and mortality in Alzheimer’s disease: an analysis using the U.S. National Alzheimer’s Coordinating Center Uniform Data Set. BMC Neurol. 2023;23:302. doi:10.1186/s12883-023-03353-w
[12] Öksüz N, Ghouri R, Taşdelen B, Uludüz D, Özge A. Mild cognitive impairment progression and Alzheimer’s disease risk: a comprehensive analysis of 3553 cases over 203 months. J Clin Med. 2024;13(2):518. doi:10.3390/jcm13020518
[13] Chen Y, Bandosz P, Stoye G, Liu Y, Wu Y, Lobanov-Rostovsky S, French E, Kivimaki M, Livingston G, Liao J, Brunner EJ. Dementia incidence trend in England and Wales, 2002–19, and projection for dementia burden to 2040: analysis of data from the English Longitudinal Study of Ageing. Lancet Public Health. 2023 Nov 1;8(11):e859–67.
[14] Biondo F, Jewell A, Pritchard M, et al. Brain-age is associated with progression to dementia in memory clinic patients. Neuroimage Clin. 2022;36:103175. doi:10.1016/j.nicl.2022.103175
[15] Ahmadi-Abhari S, Guzman-Castillo M, Bandosz P, Shipley MJ, Muniz-Terrera G, Singh-Manoux A, Kivimäki M, Steptoe A, Capewell S, O’Flaherty M, Brunner EJ. Temporal trend in dementia incidence since 2002 and projections for prevalence in England and Wales to 2040: modelling study. BMJ. 2017;358:j2856. doi:10.1136/bmj.j2856
[16] Department of Health and Social Care, NHS England. Delivering better oral health: an evidence-based toolkit for prevention. Chapter 5: periodontal diseases. London: Department of Health and Social Care; updated 10 September 2025. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/delivering-better-oral-health
[17] Zhang RQ, Ou YN, Huang SY, Li YZ, Huang YY, Zhang YR, Chen SD, Dong Q, Feng JF, Cheng W, Yu JT. Poor oral health and risk of incident dementia: a prospective cohort study of 425,183 participants. J Alzheimers Dis. 2023;93(3):977–990. doi:10.3233/JAD-230109
[18] Beydoun MA, Beydoun HA, Hossain S, El-Hajj ZW, Weiss J, Zonderman AB. Clinical and bacterial markers of periodontitis and their association with incident all-cause and Alzheimer’s disease dementia in a large national survey. J Alzheimers Dis. 2020;75(1):157–172. doi:10.3233/JAD-200064.
[19] Gong J, Harris K, Peters SAE, Woodward M. Sex differences in the association between major cardiovascular risk factors in midlife and dementia: a cohort study using data from the UK Biobank. BMC Med. 2021;19:110. doi:10.1186/s12916-021-01980-z
[20] Zhong G, Wang Y, Zhang Y, Guo JJ, Zhao Y. Smoking is associated with an increased risk of dementia: a meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies with investigation of potential effect modifiers. PLoS One. 2015;10(3):e0118333. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0118333
[21] Batty GD, Russ TC, Starr JM, et al. Modifiable cardiovascular disease risk factors as predictors of dementia death: pooling of ten general population-based cohort studies. J Negat Results Biomed. 2014;13:8. doi:10.1186/1477-5751-13-8
[22]Cao F, Yang F, Li J, et al. The relationship between diabetes and the dementia risk: a meta-analysis. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2024;16:101. doi:10.1186/s13098-024-01346-4
[23] Zhang J, Huang X, Ling Y, et al. Associations of cardiometabolic multimorbidity with all-cause dementia, Alzheimer’s disease, and vascular dementia: a cohort study in the UK Biobank. BMC Public Health. 2025;25:2397. doi:10.1186/s12889-025-23352-5
[24] Morys F, Dadar M, Dagher A. Association between midlife obesity and its metabolic consequences, cerebrovascular disease, and cognitive decline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2021;106(10):e4260–74. doi:10.1210/clinem/dgab421
[25] Kim JH, Lee Y. Dementia and death after stroke in older adults during a 10-year follow-up: results from a competing risk model. J Nutr Health Aging. 2018;22(2):297–301. doi:10.1007/s12603-017-0914-3
[26] Office for National Statistics. Adult smoking habits in the UK: 2023. Cigarette smoking habits among adults in the UK, including how many people smoke, differences between population groups, changes over time and use of e-cigarettes. Published 1 October 2024. Available from: https://www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/healthandsocialcare/healthandlifeexpectancies/bulletins/adultsmokinghabitsingreatbritain/2023 (Accessed 27 October 2025).
[27] British Heart Foundation. BHF cardiovascular disease statistics compendium 2023. London: British Heart Foundation; 2023. Available from: https://www.bhf.org.uk/-/media/files/for-professionals/research/heart-statistics/bhf-statistics-compendium-2023 (Accessed 27 October 2025).
[28] Department of Health and Social Care. Diabetes profile. Fingertips data. Available from: https://fingertips.phe.org.uk/profile/diabetes-ft/data#page/1/gid/1938133438/pat/159/par/K02000001/ati/15/are/E92000001/yrr/1/cid/4/tbm/1 (Accessed 27 October 2025).
[29] Alzheimer’s Society. The economic impact of dementia – Module 1: Annual costs of dementia. London: Alzheimer’s Society; 2024 May [cited 2025 Oct 24]. Available from: https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/sites/default/files/2024-05/the-annual-costs-of-dementia.pdf
[30] HM Treasury. GDP deflators at market prices, and money GDP: March 2025 (Spring Statement & Quarterly National Accounts) [Internet]. London: HM Treasury; 2025 Mar [cited 2025 Oct 24]. Available from: https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/gdp-deflators-at-market-prices-and-money-gdp-march-2025-spring-statement-quarterly-national-accounts
[31] Višnjić A, Veličković V, Milosavljević NŠ. QALY: measure of cost–benefit analysis of health interventions. Acta Fac Med Naiss. 2011;28(4):195–199.
[32] Mukadam N, Anderson R, Walsh S, Wittenberg R, Knapp M, Brayne C, Livingston G. Benefits of population-level interventions for dementia risk factors: an economic modelling study for England. Lancet Healthy Longev. 2024;5(9):e567–e577. doi:10.1016/S2666-7568(24)00156-3
[33] Kind P, Hardman G, Macran S. UK population norms for EQ-5D. York: Centre for Health Economics, University of York; 1999 Nov. Report No.: 172.
[34]  Reed C, Barrett A, Lebrec J, et al. How useful is the EQ-5D in assessing the impact of caring for people with Alzheimer’s disease? Health Qual Life Outcomes. 2017;15:16. doi:10.1186/s12955-017-0591-2
[35] National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Guide to the methods of technology appraisal. Process and methods [PMG9]. London: National Institute for Health and Care Excellence; 2013.
